Reflected aria attributes containing element references (#38678)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/element/ariaactivedescendantelement/index.md

page-type: web-api-instance-property
browser-compat: api.Element.ariaActiveDescendantElement
---

{{APIRef("DOM")}}

The **`ariaActiveDescendantElement`** property of the {{domxref("Element")}} interface represents the current active element when focus is on a [`composite`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/composite_role) widget, [`combobox`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/combobox_role), [`textbox`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/textbox_role), [`group`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/group_role), or [`application`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Roles/application_role).

The [`aria-activedescendant`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-activedescendant) topic contains additional information about how the attribute and property should be used.

## Value

An element that is the active descendant, or `null` if there is no active descendant.

## Description

The property is a flexible alternative to using the [`aria-activedescendant`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-activedescendant) attribute.

> Unlike `aria-activedescendant`, the element assigned to this property can be selected: it does not have to have an `id`.

Author: Thanks. This is indeed the point.

> The property reflects the element's [`aria-activedescendant`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-errormessage) attribute when it is defined, but only for reference `id` values that match valid in-scope elements.

Author: It is logical - if `getAttribute()` returns a non-empty value, then the property will have an array containing the elements that have matching `id` values in the same DOM or an ancestor (parent) DOM.

This is a bit tricky, because when I think "attribute" my first though is "the text applied to the tag" - but of course it is actually another dynamic property.

I will roll out this pattern change everywhere:

```suggestion
The property reflects the element's [`aria-activedescendant`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-errormessage) attribute if it is has a value other than the empty string, but only for listed reference `id` values that match elements in this element's DOM tree, or a parent DOM tree.
```

> The property reflects the element's [`aria-activedescendant`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-errormessage) attribute when it is defined, but only for reference `id` values that match valid in-scope elements.

Author: Marking as resolved as we talked this through offline.

  );

  // Select the avenue div by position and assign as ariaActiveDescendantElement
  const avenueDiv = document.querySelector("#streetType div:nth-child(3)");
  streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement = avenueDiv;

  // Log again, showing that aria-activedescendant is "" and the ariaActiveDescendantElement has new value
  log(
    `aria-activedescendant: '${streetType.getAttribute("aria-activedescendant")}', el: ${streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement}, txt: ${streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement?.textContent.trim()}`,
  );
} else {
  log("ariaActiveDescendantElement not supported by browser");
}
```

#### Result

The log below shows the output of the above code.
The first line is the original reference id in `aria-activedescendant` (`avenue`), the associated element obtained from `ariaActiveDescendantElement`, and the text in that element.
The second line shows the new element that was selected and assigned. Note that the value of the `aria-activedescendant` attribute is now `""`.

{{EmbedLiveSample("Get the active descendent","100%","190px")}}

<!-- Come back to this. Show shadow root can't be selected, and also this, that you can move in and out of scope -->
<!--

> 

Author: Bit below here to be redone.

In other words, a shadow root can set an active descendant from within its own shadow DOM or the parent DOM, but a DOM element can't set an active descendent defined in a shadow root.

Unlike `aria-activedescendant`, the element assigned to this property does not have to have an `id`: it can be selected using any available mechanism, such as its position in their hierarchy, or some other attribute.
This can be convenient as it avoids having to unnecessarily create ids for elements in order to assign them as the active descendent.

The [`aria-activedescendant`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-activedescendant) topic contains additional information about when the property can and should be set.

## Value

An element that is the active descendant, or `null` if there is no active descendant.

Note that when the property is set, the corresponding [`aria-activedescendant`](/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Reference/Attributes/aria-activedescendant) attribute is set to the empty string (`""`), and this will be returned by {{domxref("Element.getAttribute()")}}.

> The attribute can subsequently be set using {{domxref("Element.setAttribute()")}}, in which case the referenced element will replace the property value if it is in scope.

Author: ```suggestion
The attribute can subsequently be set using {{domxref("Element.setAttribute()")}}, in which case the referenced element will replace the property value if it is in scope, or be set to `null` if it is not in scope/invalid.
```

The active descendent is set using `aria-activedescendant`.

```html
<div id="streetType" role="listbox" aria-activedescendant="avenue">
  <div id="street">Street</div>
  <div id="avenue">Avenue</div>
  <div id="lane">Lane</div>
</div>
```

```html hidden
<pre id="log"></pre>
```

```css hidden
#log {
  height: 70px;
  overflow: scroll;
  padding: 0.5rem;
  border: 1px solid black;
}
```

#### JavaScript

The code below first checks whether the `ariaActiveDescendantElement` is supported.
It then logs the value of the `id` reference from the attribute, and then the property element and its text content.

```js hidden
const logElement = document.querySelector("#log");
function log(text) {
  logElement.innerText = `${logElement.innerText}${text}\n`;
  logElement.scrollTop = logElement.scrollHeight;
}
```

```js
// Feature test for ariaActiveDescendantElement
if ("ariaActiveDescendantElement" in Element.prototype) {
  // Log id for active descendant relationship through the content attribute.
  log(

>     `aria-activedescendant (id): ${streetType.getAttribute("aria-activedescendant")}`,

Author: Note, all these examples show the id from the attribute as empty. I'm leaving it here for now because the [explainer](https://wicg.github.io/aom/aria-reflection-explainer.html#reflecting-element-references) says this should be populated - "sprouted" - when you set the attribute.

  // We make the active descendant of the streetType the lane.
  streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement = laneElement;
  log(
    `txt: ${streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement?.textContent.trim()}, el: ${streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement}, id: ${streetType.getAttribute("aria-activedescendant")}`,
  );

  // We then move the referenced element (lane) into shadow DOM (fridge).
  shadowRoot.appendChild(laneElement);
  // The active descendant relationship is now non-observable.
  //element should be null - referenced element out of scope
  // but the referenced element id should still be here
  log(
    `txt: ${streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement?.textContent.trim()}, el: ${streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement}, id: ${streetType.getAttribute("aria-activedescendant")}`,
  );

  // Move the referenced element (lane) back into the DOM
  streetType.appendChild(laneElement);
  // Our active descendant relationship remained intact!
  log(
    `txt: ${streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement?.textContent.trim()}, el: ${streetType.ariaActiveDescendantElement}, id: ${streetType.getAttribute("aria-activedescendant")}`,

>   );

Author: This all works, but I am a bit confused by whether you should be able to set an active descendant for a DOM element to be inside shadow DOM or not. Testing seems to say no?

Author: Note, you can't. You can set in same scope or ancestor scope.
